---
layout: layouts/post.njk
title: Research Papers
templateClass: tmpl-post
eleventyNavigation:
  key: Research
  order: 3
---


## [Training for strength and hypertrophy: an evidence-based approach](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1QQKYQIni8SEPYAUGIly1_B9VR5Fp4PIh/preview)

Resistance exercise training (RET)-induced increases in voluntary 1RM strength are greater if the RET is performed with higher loads and replication (or close) of the strength test. In contrast, RET-induced muscular hypertrophy is primarily mediated by intensity of effort, which is achieved by performing RET to volitional fatigue and with an internal focus on contracting a muscle throughout the exercise range of motion.
In addition, RET-induced muscular hypertrophy is augmented by increasing training volume, but with diminishing returns. Other training variables such as volume-load, inter-set rest, and time under tension have negligible effects on RET-induced changes in muscle size or strength. We conclude that an uncomplicated, evidence-based approach to optimizing RET-induced changes in muscle size and strength follows the FITT principle: frequency, intensity (effort), type, and time.



## [A systematic review and meta-analysis of the effect of aerobic vs. resistance exercise training on visceral fat](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1FJSp3dMZcXemoaR3MGskfcSIfMUjxjh3/preview)

It is increasingly recognized that the location of excess adiposity, particularly increased deposition of visceral adipose tissue (VAT), is important when determining the adverse health effects of overweight and obesity. Exercise therapy is an integral component of obesity management, but the most potent exercise prescription for VAT benefit is unclear. We aimed to evaluate the independent and synergistic effects of aerobic exercise (AEx) and progressive resistance training (PRT) and to directly compare the efficacy of AEx and PRT for beneficial VAT modulation. 

A systematic review and meta-analysis was performed to assess the efficacy of exercise interventions on VAT content/volume in overweight and obese adults. Relevant databases were searched to November 2010. Included studies were randomized controlled designs in which AEx or PRT in isolation or combination were employed for 4 weeks or more in adult humans, where computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was used for quantification of VAT pre- and post-intervention. Of the 12196 studies from the initial search, 35 were included. After removal of outliers, there was a significant pooled effect size (ES) for the comparison between AEx therapy and control (-0.33, 95% CI: -0.52 to -0.14; P < 0.01) but not for the comparison between PRT therapy and control (0.09, 95% CI: -0.17 to -0.36; P = 0.49). Of the available nine studies which directly compared AEx with PRT, the pooled ES did not reach statistical significance (ES = 0.23, 95% CI: -0.02 to 0.50; P = 0.07 favouring AEx). The pooled ES did not reach statistical significance for interventions that combined AEx and PRT therapy vs. control (-0.28, 95% CI: -0.69 to 0.14; P = 0.19), for which only seven studies were available. 

These data suggest that aerobic exercise is central for exercise programmes aimed at reducing VAT, and that aerobic exercise below current recommendations for overweight/obesity management may be sufficient for beneficial VAT modification. Further investigation is needed regarding the efficacy and feasibility of multi-modal training as a means of reducing VAT.

## [Alternate day fasting for weight loss in normal weight and overweight subjects: a randomized controlled trial](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1IG3MkHPZSZO6La0HsBXvJGCO-fmnBFCT/preview)

**Background**: Alternate day fasting (ADF; ad libitum “feed day”, alternated with 25% energy intake “fast day”), is effective for weight loss and cardio-protection in obese individuals. Whether these effects occur in normal weight and overweight individuals remains unknown. This study examined the effect of ADF on body weight and coronary heart disease risk in non-obese subjects.
**Methods**: Thirty-two subjects (BMI 20–29.9 kg/m2) were randomized to either an ADF group or a control group for 12 weeks.
**Results**: Body weight decreased (P < 0.001) by 5.2 ± 0.9 kg (6.5 ± 1.0%) in the ADF group, relative to the control group, by week 12. Fat mass was reduced (P < 0.001) by 3.6 ± 0.7 kg, and fat free mass did not change, versus controls. Triacylglycerol concentrations decreased (20 ± 8%, P < 0.05) and LDL particle size increased (4 ± 1 Å, P < 0.01) in the ADF group relative to controls. CRP decreased (13 ± 17%, P < 0.05) in the ADF group relative to controls at week 12. Plasma adiponectin increased (6 ± 10%, P < 0.01) while leptin decreased (40 ± 7%, P < 0.05) in the ADF group versus controls by the end of the study. LDL cholesterol, HDL cholesterol, homocysteine and resistin concentrations remained unchanged after 12 weeks of treatment.
**Conclusion**: These findings suggest that ADF is effective for weight loss and cardio-protection in normal weight and overweight adults, though further research implementing larger sample sizes is required before solid conclusion can be reached.
**Keywords**: Alternate day fasting, Calorie restriction, Weight loss, Cholesterol, Blood pressure, Adipokines, Coronary heart disease, Non-obese humans

## [Impact of resistance exercise on human skeletal muscle](https://drive.google.com/file/d/105_ECdeZK6YXn8hqv1vJHMrDltTF0UHJ/preview)

**Abstract**: Normally, skeletal muscle mass is unchanged, beyond periods of growth, but it begins to decline in the fourth or fifth decade of life. The mass of skeletal muscle is maintained by ingestion of protein-containing meals. With feeding, muscle protein synthesis (MPS) is stimulated and a small suppression of muscle protein breakdown (MPB) occurs, such that protein balance becomes positive (MPS > MPB). As the postprandial period subsides and a transition toward fasting occurs, the balance of muscle protein turnover becomes negative again (MPB > MPS). Thus, during maintenance of skeletal muscle mass, the long-term net result is that MPS is balanced by MPB. Acutely, however, it is of interest to determine what regulates feeding-induced increases in MPS, since it appears that, in a number of scenarios (for example aging, disuse, and wasting diseases), a suppression of MPS in response to feeding is a common finding. In fact, recent findings point to the fact that loss of skeletal muscle mass with disuse and aging is due not chronic changes in MPS or MPB, but to a blunted feeding-induced rise in MPS. Resistance exercise is a potent stimulator of MPS and appears to synergistically enhance the gains stimulated by feeding. As such, resistance exercise is an important countermeasure to disuse atrophy and to age-related declines in skeletal muscle mass. What is less well understood is how the intensity and volume of the resistance exercise stimulus is sufficient to result in rises in MPS. Recent advances in this area are discussed here, with a focus on human in vivo data.

## [The Influence of Frequency, Intensity, Volume on Muscle Size](https://drive.google.com/file/d/13xofcMyv6mfE1ZeC2oua2hpOYkW4qs67/preview)


**Abstract** Strength training is an important component in sports training and rehabilitation. Quantification of the dose-response relationships between raining variables and the outcome is fundamental for the proper prescription of resistance training. The purpose of this comprehensive review was to identify dose-response relationships for the development of muscle hypertrophy by calculating the magnitudes and rates of increases in muscle cross-sectional area induced by varying levels of frequency, intensity and volume, as well as by different modes of strength training.

## [The Effects of Periodized and Constant-Intensity Training on Body Composition, strength, and Performance](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1ESe0pTQHnJhFEFB6GO3kJycXbU7kp7KN/preview)

**Abstract** This study examined the effects of manipulating training intensity on strength, body composition, and performance in trained ROTC cadets. Fourteen male ROTC cadets were pre-and posttested for % body fat and 1-RM strength on the bench press and parallel squat. Performance was measured via the physical fitness components of the Army Ranger Challenge and consisted of push-ups, sit-ups, 2-mile run, and 10-km ruck-run. Subjects were matched according to military experience and randomly assigned to a periodized model or a constant-intensity model for 10 weeks of resistance training. Total training volume was equal between groups. The periodized group significantly increased in 1-RM bench press, 1-RM parallel squat, and push-ups, and significantly decreased % fat and ruck-run time. The constant-intensity group significantly increased 1-RM parallel squat and push-ups, and significantly decreased their 2-mile run and ruck-run time. The periodized group completed the ruck-run significantly faster than the constant-intensity group. The results indicate that following a 10-week training cycle with trained subjects, significant improvements in body composition, strength, and performance can be obtained using two different training programs that have equal total relative training volume.

This study examined the effects of manipulating training intensity on strength, body composition, and performance in trained ROTC cadets. Fourteen male ROTC cadets were pre-and posttested for % body fat and 1-RM strength on the bench press and parallel squat. Performance was measured via the physical fitness components of the Army Ranger Challenge and consisted of push-ups, sit-ups, 2-mile run, and 10-km ruck-run. Subjects were matched according to military experience and randomly assigned to a periodized model or a constant-intensity model for 10 weeks of resistance training. Total training volume was equal between groups. The periodized group significantly increased in 1-RM bench press, 1-RM parallel squat, and push-ups, and significantly decreased % fat and ruck-run time. The constant-intensity group significantly increased 1-RM parallel squat and push-ups, and significantly decreased their 2-mile run and ruck-run time. The periodized group completed the ruck-run significantly faster than the constant-intensity group. The results indicate that following a 10-week training cycle with trained subjects, significant improvements in body composition, strength, and performance can be obtained using two different training programs that have equal total relative training volume.