---
title: Review of Recent Fitness Studies VI Squats, Foam Rolling & Training to Failure
description: This is a post on My Blog about agile frameworks.
date: 2020-08-03
tags:
  - review
layout: layouts/post.njk
---

Hello, some of you may remember me for making these kinds of posts awhile back. I have still been reading a lot and I wanted to write up another post for everyone again. As usual, this is solely for educational purposes and I hope to encourage a lot of discussion below. Something cool to note is that all of these papers were published this year!

A short review on training to failure and its implications on muscle hypertrophy (muscle growth) by Schoenfeld & Grgic (2019) was recently published. Training to failure is the method of training where repetitions within a set are done until proper form in the exercise cannot be executed. This practice is actually rather common in training programmes because it is theorized that it accumulates more metabolic stress in the muscles and has higher motor unit recruitment. Metabolic stress and hypertrophy do not have a simple relationship as of now even though it is commonly thought that more metabolic stress would lead to more hypertrophy. Motor unit recruitment is how the body will activate specific motor units in order according to the load the muscles must overcome. A motor unit is defined by the muscle fibers that are stimulated by one motor neuron (a nerve, essentially). According to Henneman’s size principle, fatigue-resistant, small, weaker motor units will be recruited first and if required, larger and stronger motor units will be activated. In the context of failure, load is important because high loads (failure or not) will recruit all motor units immediately which makes the motor unit recruitment benefit of failure, null. It is important to describe what the literature generally compares training to failure against. A common alternative is a technique where the endpoint of a set is where you believe you can only do one or two more repetitions.

The authors found that studies showing training to failure to be superior have some design issues. For example, Goto, Ishii, Kizuka, Takamatsu (2005) had these results but the group that did not train to failure had inter-repetition rest which does not reflect how people usually train. Normally, you would complete all your repetitions and rest once the entire set is completed. It is possible that without the inter-repetition rest, both groups would have had similar hypertrophy outcomes. There are studies where both methods result in similar hypertrophy amongst participants. Nobrega et al. (2018) had 32 participants perform either high loads or low loads to failure or not to failure in leg extensions. Quadricep cross-sectional area was similar between failure and non-failure conditions.

At this point, there clearly is not enough data to infer any solid conclusions regarding training to failure. Regardless, some potential practical implications are the use of frequency and exercise selection for failure. Training to failure can be taxing on the body. Izquierdo et al. (2006) had a group training to failure twice a week for 16 weeks and they had a lower number of hormones like testosterone that would help with muscle growth. Therefore, if failure is in a training programme, it may be wise to limit its use to once a week, once every other week or at the end of a mesocycle (a programme) where you are peaking with volume. Exercise selection may also be important as failure for multi-joint movements such as the bench press or the squat may be more taxing than single-joint movements like a bicep curl or a leg extension.

**tl;dr:** Hard to say if training to failure has any benefits over training just shy of failure. Regardless, it can be dangerous if used improperly so its implementation into a training programme must be done carefully.

— — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — —

A common response to fatigue from strenuous exercise is to consume water. The body becomes dehydrated over time with intense activity and it is important to rehydrate. However, is it possible that plain water consumption may have an adverse effect on the body during/after exercise? Lau, Kato & Nosaka (2019) recently investigated the effects of water consumption on exercise-associated muscle cramps and how water compares to an oral rehydration solution (Gatorade).

Previous hypotheses suggested that exercise-associated muscle cramps were related to electrolyte abnormalities (diminished minerals like sodium or potassium during exercise). Unfortunately, amongst several problems, electrolyte abnormalities would not explain such a localised manifestation (a cramp in only one muscle) rather than a systemic one and it would not explain why stretching the muscle provides relief. Modern theory proposes that it is more of a neural disorder where there is an imbalance between the golgi tendon organ and the muscle spindles. The golgi tendon organ is located at both ends of muscles and it serves to prevent over-contraction. Muscle spindles are wrapped around the muscle fibres which perform the opposite (prevents over-stretching).

Despite that, it would be careless to completely eliminate electrolytes from the equation in regards to exercise-associated muscle cramps. In this study, 10 healthy men drank either water or Gatorade after downhill running in a cross-over fashion (all 10 participants would try both beverages, one beverage one week and another the next week). Blood tests would be done before, immediately after and 80 minutes after the run. To determine the intervention’s effect on cramps, electrical stimulation would be applied to calf until a cramp could be induced otherwise known as the threshold frequency. If the threshold frequency was lower, it would imply that you were more susceptible to cramps.

Dehydration had no effect on cramp susceptibility. Cramp susceptibility increased with water but decreased with Gatorade. Cramp susceptibility actually decreased lower than baseline with Gatorade. This reduced cramp susceptibility is unlikely related to electrolytes because Gatorade did not actually increase electrolytes to a significant extent according to the blood tests. Gatorade did, however, have glucose which may have had an effect on cramp susceptibility. This, along with how long cramp susceptibility is increased with water, should be looked into more scrupulously in future studies.

**TL;DR:** Water intake after exercise may actually lead to a higher chance of having exercise-associated muscle cramps when compared to Gatorade intake.

— — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — —

Squats are a popular lower-body exercise as it increases lower body strength, stimulates lower body hypertrophy and has good translation into the performance of important movements like jumping. There has been some doubt as to what is the optimal range of motion for a squat. Deep squats have been shown to have higher muscle activation but it is not entirely impossible that shallow squats lead to comparable strength/muscle size gains. Kubo, Ikebukuro & Yata (2019) sought out to compare the two squat variations amongst 17 healthy males. The participants were either put into a group that did deep squats (knee angle of around 140 degrees) or a group that did shallow squats (knee angle of around 90 degrees, about parallel). The groups were matched according to baseline characteristics and physical ability. Subjects were physically active but none of them followed any specific training programme within the past year.

The entire programme lasted 10 weeks with a training frequency of twice a week. Two familiarization sessions were done before the 10 weeks to get used to proper squat form and to determine 1 repetition maxes (maximum load you can squat within one repetition). Each proper training session involved three sets. Participants worked up to 90% of their 1 repetition maximum for 8 repetitions for a few weeks. 5kg would be added to the load if they could complete the 8 repetitions. Outcomes measured were squat 1 repetition maxima and various muscle sizes including all the quadriceps, the hamstring muscles, hip adductors and the gluteus maximus. This study is the first to directly measure glute and hip adductor hypertrophy in response to squats. Muscle size was measured with serial MRI images which is the gold standard for muscle size measurement as it can differentiate between muscles and distinguish muscle, intramuscular fat and water.

The deep squat group had greater improvements in the deep squat 1 repetition maximum, around 20% better. However, both groups improved in the shallow squat 1 repetition maximum to a similar degree. Quadricep muscles grew about the same between groups. The rectus femoris did not grow to a significant extent in either group (which is in-line with previous research). This is likely because the rectus femoris muscle is a biarticular muscle (a muscle which crosses two joints). When you ascend in the squat, the rectus femoris will try to contract to help with knee extension but it will also stretch as the hip extends. This leads to the muscle being about the same length throughout the entire movement. The hamstring muscles in both groups grew similarly. The gluteus maximus and the hip adductors hypertrophied (grew) more in the deep squat group although not by much. These results can only be applied to untrained males.

**TL;DR:** In untrained males, deep squats may lead to better strength gains in the deep squat and may have better hypertrophy outcomes in the gluteus maximus as well as the hip adductors.

— — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — —

Foam rolling is the use of foam cylinders, sticks, bars or various other foam equipment for self-massage either before or after exercise in hopes to improve performance or recovery. It is thought to have effects on the thixotropy of muscles which is just another way of saying that it is able to reduce muscle stiffness. They may also help with myofascial trigger points or “knots” in your muscle but the physiology behind all of this is controversial and is a story for another day. Other potential benefits is that it can reduce muscle soreness and increase blood flow to muscles. Wiewelhove et al. (2019) developed a meta-analysis on the subject to see if foam rolling really works. A meta-analysis is the pooling of several studies together to control sampling variance and to get a better idea of the data at a population level.

The analysis was bifurcated into foam rolling before exercise and foam rolling after exercise. Pre-rolling had small effects on sprint performance and flexibility and essentially no effects on strength and jump performance. Post-rolling had small effects on sprint/strength recovery and muscle pain perception. Otherwise, post-rolling had nothing to show for.

While the data for foam rolling was not impressive, it is possible that foam rolling is still relevant for elite athletes. This is because very small improvements in performance are still valuable if your variation in performance is very narrow. If you are a novice, your performance is likely to be highly variable and minor improvements will not be able to manifest itself in performance. Despite all this, there are a few issues with the meta analysis. Most of the studies vary in design and how they carried out the investigations. This makes pooling the research very difficult and is known as high heterogeneity. Furthermore, since you are not able to blind study participants or investigators to foam rolling interventions, the potential for bias and placebo effects is high. Adverse effects from foam rolling should also be considered even though it is generally considered to be relatively harmless. Some populations with peripheral nerve or artery diseases may be at an increased risk for possible adverse effects from foam rolling but more research is needed.

**TL;DR:** Foam rolling is likely not very beneficial for performance or recovery if you’re not an elite athlete. However, it may not hurt to do it anyways.

— — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — —

Protein is an important macronutrient that amongst many processes, facilitates muscle growth and recovery. Having healthy muscles is important for completing every day tasks and this becomes increasingly critical as we age. Sarcopenia is the gradual loss of muscle mass generally associated with aging. This is tough to combat as the anabolic response to protein decreases as we age. That is to say, old people do not respond as well as their younger counterparts to an equal amount of protein. The elderly also tend to have a poor appetite towards high protein foods like meat which is related to chewing being tougher in that demographic and various metabolic issues. Researchers have taken this issue and have proceeded to look down other avenues for protein supplementation with one of these being plant-based proteins.

Berrazaga, Micard, Gueugneau & Walrand (2019) compiled a review of plant-based protein sources and how they fare against animal-based protein sources. While this study was more in the scope of older demographics, it is still relevant to younger people especially those who consume more plant-based foods. Animal proteins are generally more digestible. This may be because their protein structure are mainly alpha-helix based instead of beta-sheets (these are just different ways particles within proteins can be organized) which makes it easier for the body’s enzymes to digest. In regards to digestibility, however, heating the plant-based foods can make its proteins more accessible. Another issue with plant-based proteins is that they lack a variety of essential amino acids. An amino acid is the basic building block of proteins. There are 20 standard amino acids and 9 of them are labelled as “essential amino acids”. These are amino acids that cannot be synthesized within the human body and they can only be obtained from food. Some amino acids can even be essential earlier on in life but then become non-essential as our metabolic systems develop with age. Ideally, a protein source would be able to fulfill the requirements for all essential amino acids.

When put directly against animal-based proteins, the animal protein tends to have a much higher muscle protein synthesis rate after consumption. Muscle protein synthesis is the building of muscle via protein. This is only measuring an acute response but even in more long-term studies, animal protein still outdoes plant protein. To alleviate these problems, it has been suggested to simply eat more protein. It was found that 60g of wheat protein was as good as 35g of whey protein in the context of muscle protein synthesis. Combining different plant proteins that complement each other in regards to essential amino acid content may be a solution but has yet to be studied. Some plant proteins with genetic mutations can be selectively bred in order to have better quality protein. This strategy has been shown to work in children when measuring growth rates among them.

**TL;DR:** Plant-based proteins may not be as good as animal-based proteins due to their poor digestibility and lacking essential amino acid content. Some strategies to sidestep these issues show promise but it all needs more research especially in the context of sarcopenia.

— — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — —

Berrazaga, I., Micard, V., Gueugneau, M. & Walrand, S. (2019). The Role of the Anabolic Properties of Plant- versus Animal-Based Protein Sources in Supporting Muscle Mass Maintenance: A Critical Review. Nutrients. 11(8), pp. 1825.

Kubo, K., Ikebukuro, T. & Yata H. (2019). Effects of squat training with different depths on lower limb muscle volumes. European Journal of Applied Physiology. 119(9), pp. 1933–1942.

Lau, W., Kato, H. & Nosaka, K. (2019). Water intake after dehydration makes muscles more susceptible to cramp but electrolytes reverse that effect. BMJ Open Sport & Exercise Medicine. 5(1), pp. e000478.

Schoenfeld, B. & Grgic, J. (2019). Does Training to Failure Maximize Muscle Hypertrophy? Strength & Conditioning Journal. 10.1519/SSC.0000000000000473.

Wiewelhove, T., Döweling, A., Schneider, C., Hottenrott, L., Meyer, T., Kellmann, M., Pfeiffer, M. & Ferrauti, A. (2019). A Meta-Analysis of the Effects of Foam Rolling on Performance and Recovery. Frontiers in Physiology. 10(376), pp. .